Grand Theft Auto & Grand Theft Auto: London 1969
Multiplier Locations guide, v1.0 (2/1/2004)
by Dammit9x
dammit9x at hotmail dot com

    This document may be not be reproduced under any circumstances except for 
personal, private use. It may not be placed on any web site besides 
www.gamefaqs.com or otherwise distributed publicly without advance written 
permission. Use of this guide on any other web site or as a part of any public 
display is strictly prohibited, and a violation of copyright.

Contents
--------
I)    Introduction
II)   Game Tips
III)  The Multipliers
   1)  Liberty City: Gangsta Bang
   2)  Liberty City: Heist Almighty
   3)  San Andreas: Mandarin Mayhem
   4)  San Andreas: Tequila Slammer
   5)  Vice City: Bent Cop Blues
   6)  Vice City: Rasta Blasta
   7)  London: Boys Will be Thieves
   8)  London: Mods and Sods
   9)  London: Chelsea Smile
  10)  London: Dead Certainty
IV)    Closing

I) Introduction
---------------
    No one else has made a guide for this information, so here it is.
    Each stage in GTA requires a minimum score to complete. You can get points 
faster by increasing your score multiplier (the little yellow number to the 
left of your score). One way to do this is to complete missions. The easier 
method is to pick up Multiplier Up bonuses from boxes. The problem is knowing 
where those boxes are for each level, which is where this guide comes in. 
Using this guide in conjuction with a mission guide can make the game a lot 
less frustrating. There doesn't seem to be any limit on how high your 
multiplier can go. You can conceivably get a 20x or more bonus. I found more 
multipliers for the harder levels, because I spent more time on them. 

A guide like this is never complete. Corrections and additions are welcome.

II) Game Tips
-------------
    Save your game often! Oh wait, you can't do that in this game... In that 
case finish the level as soon as you have enough points. This game is rather 
buggy and unstable for a Playstation game. I always get freezes and red 
screens of death (complete with FATAL ERROR messages) before my score can 
approach the maximum. Just finish the level. If you want to try out the other 
missions and Kill Frenzies, just play it again.

    Get the multipliers early in the level, preferably before the first 
mission, to maximize your points. If done correctly you shouldn't have to do 
more than about half of the missions to qualify.

    Don't ever get arrested. Without a Get Out of Jail Free Key, the cops will 
take away half your multiplier. Even if you do have a Key getting arrested 
will usually screw whatever mission you're working on. Do whatever it takes to 
avoid being caught. Learn where the spray shops are, and always carry a 
machine gun. I hate cops.

    A related point, don't needlessly piss the cops off. Running over people 
is fun but makes more trouble for you.

    For that matter, don't get killed. You keep your multiplier but lose all 
your stuff. The later levels have limited resources (in terms of weapons and 
armor). Do the riskier missions after the safer missions. Avoid doing Kill 
Frenzies before you're ready to finish the level because they expose you to a 
high risk of getting killed or arrested.

    A tip for using machine guns against people: Rather than trying to aim, go 
for the spray 'n' pray method. Point in the general direction of your target, 
hold the fire button and mash your thumb between left and right. This can also 
be done on the move.

    The model car Kill Frenzies are not only fun, but a valuable tool for 
missions where you have to kill a lot of people or cars. Why not blow them up 
from a safe distance?

    Don't use the cheat codes. That's weak.


III)  The Multipliers
---------------------
   1)  Liberty City: Gangsta Bang
-On the island E of Law Island. Use a bike to jump the ramp E of the N/S 
highway. Jump from the S half of the ramp and brake quickly once you reach the 
other side.

   2)  Liberty City: Heist Almighty
-On the island E of Law Island. Don't lose sight of your bike this time 
because you won't find another one on the island.
-S Nolaw, E of a N/S road near the Island View bridge

   3)  San Andreas: Mandarin Mayhem
-N Richman behind the long fence, next to the water
-NW Atlantic Heights in one of two boxes in a large backyard. Access through 
fence is in W Atlantic Heights.
-SW Atlantic Heights apartment complex
-W Aye Valley in an alley W of the parking lot
-W Sunview, in alley S of fenced-off building

   4)  San Andreas: Tequila Slammer
-SE Woodside, S of river, E of bridge
-S Sunrise by SE building
-W Sailor's Wharf in a building interior through an alley accessed from the N 
(a tank was here in the previous level)
-NE Richman large apartment complex, accessed through NW Atlantic Heights
-SW Telephone Hill, E of overpass
-NW Telephone Hill yard on a cliff near the border
-SW Sunview on the dock behind the walled-in house. Getting access requires 
doing the mission from the far left phone in Sailor's Wharf.

   5)  Vice City: Bent Cop Blues
-There are two on the hospital roof in C Little Dominica. Use the stairs in NW 
Little Dominica. I recommend throwing yourself off the roof afterward so you 
won't have to walk all the way back.
-SW Vice Beach on the sand to the W of the left bridge
-SW Vice Beach on the sand to the W of the right bridge. Use a bike to cross 
the electric tracks. If you're quick you can make it back across without 
blowing up.
-SE Coral City police department by the E/W road that passes through it

   6)  Vice City: Rasta Blasta
-NE Banana Grove hospital roof. The box on the left is a rocket frenzy. You 
can get down quickly and safely afterward by falling from the left ledge.
-S Coral City police department roof
-C Little Dominica hospital roof as before, but there is only one this time
-NE Vice Beach, far corner of the map
-NW Vice beach, hidden in a nook on the hotel grounds that opens to the E

   7)  London: Boys Will be Thieves
none

   8)  London: Mods and Sods
-E Mile End rooftop

   9)  London: Chelsea Smile
-E Mile End alley, just N of the multiplier in the last level
-E Brixton, S of the highway

  10)  London: Dead Certainty
-SW Brixton N of Highway


X) Closing
----------
    That's it. This document is entirely my own work. Any questions, comments, 
corrections or complaints should be addressed to treasurehunterx@hotmail.com, 
with clear indication in the subject line that the email is concerning this 
FAQ. Only queries concerning the FAQ should be emailed; refrain from asking 
questions that can be more effectively addressed on the gamefaqs message 
boards.
